## Goblin Ambush

```
You've been on the Triboar Trail for about half a day. As you come around a bend, you spot two dead horses sprawled about fifty feet ahead of you, blocking the path. Each has several black-feathered arrows sticking out of it. The woods press close to the trail here, with a steep embankment and dense thickets on either side.
```

Any character who approaches to make a closer investigation can identify the horses as belonging to Gundren Rockseeker and Sildar Hallwinter. They've been dead about a day, and it's clear that arrows killed the horses. When the characters inspect the scene closer, read the following:

```
The saddlebags have been looted. Nearby lies an empty leather map case.
```

Four goblins are hiding in the woods, two on each side of the road. They wait until someone approaches the bodies and then attack.

This will likely be the first of many combat encounters in the adventure. Here are the steps you should follow to run it effectively:

 - Check to see who, if anyone, is surprised. The party cannot surprise the goblins, but the goblins might surprise some or all the characters. Make a [Goblin Dexterity (Stealth) check](roll "1d20+6"), rolling once for all of them. Compare the result to the characters' passive Wisdom (Perception) scores **13**. Any character whose score is lower than the goblins' check result is surprised and loses his or her turn during the first round of combat.
    - Goblins stealth roll **[r:gob_stealth=1d20+6]: [r:if(gob_stealth > 13, "Goblins stay hidden", "Goblins are seen!!")]**
 - Use the initiative rules in the rulebook to determine who acts first, second, third, and so on. Keep track of everyone's initiative count in the margins of this book or on a separate piece of paper.
 - When the time comes for the goblins to act, two of them rush forward and make melee attacks while the other goblins stand 30 feet away from the party and make ranged attacks. The [goblin](npc)s' stat block contains the information you need to resolve these attacks.
 - When 2 goblins are defeated, the last goblin attempts to flee, heading for the goblin trail.

## Developments

In the unlikely event that the goblins defeat the adventurers, they leave them unconscious, loot them and the wagon, then head back to the Cragmaw hideout. The characters can continue on to Phandalin, buy new gear at Barthen's Provisions, return to the ambush site, and find the goblins' trail.

The characters might capture one or more goblins by knocking them unconscious instead of killing them. A character can use any melee weapon to knock a goblin unconscious, succeeding if the attack deals enough damage to drop the goblin to 0 hit points. Once it regains consciousness after a few minutes, a captured goblin can be convinced to share what it knows (see the [What the Goblins Know](note "What the Goblins Know@Lib:LMoP Notebook") sidebar on page 8). A goblin can also be persuaded to lead the party to the Cragmaw hideout while avoiding traps along the way (see the ['Goblin Trail' section](token "02. Goblin Trail")).

The characters might not find the goblin trail, or they could decide to continue to Phandalin. In that case, skip ahead to part 2, "Phandalin." Elmar Barthen (the owner of Barthen's Provisions) seeks out the characters and informs them that Gundren Rockseeker never arrived. He recounts the goblin troubles and suggests that the characters return to the ambush site to investigate further (after they rest). Barthen also tells the party that Linene Graywind of the Lionshield Coster (see page 16) can provide more information on the goblin attacks.

## Rests

The party might need to [rest](note "8d. Resting@Lib:Rules") after the goblin ambush, depending on how the battle plays out.