# Redbrand Hideout
The Redbrands' base in Phandalin is a dungeon complex under Tresendar Manor. Before the manor was ruined, its cellars served as safe storage for food and water in the event that the estate was attacked, while an adjoining crypt provided a resting place for the deceased members of the Tresendar family. The Redbrands have since expanded the cellars to suit their own purposes, adding slave pens, workshops, and barracks.

If the characters begin their search at Tresendar Manor, they enter the dungeon in area 1. If they instead follow Carp Alderleaf to the secret tunnel the lad found, they enter the dungeon by way of area 8.

## General Features
The hideout consists of well-built dungeon chambers with flagstone floors and walls of dressed stone blocks. The western end of the complex is lower than the eastern end, with stairs leading down as the characters explore.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Ceilings***. Passages and chambers are 10 feet high unless otherwise indicated.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Doors***. All doors are made of wood with iron handles, hinges, and built-in locks. They are unlocked unless the text states otherwise. Iarno Albrek (area 12) and a bugbear named Mosk (area 9) each carry an iron key that can lock or unlock every door in the complex.
A locked door can be picked with thieves' tools and a successful DC 10 Dexterity check. A door can also be broken down with a successful DC 20 Strength check.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Secret Doors***. An "S" on the Redbrand Hideout map indicates the location of a secret door.
Secret doors are made of stone and blend in with the surrounding walls. Spotting a secret door from a distance of no more than 10 feet without actively searching for it requires a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 15 or higher, whereas a character who takes the time to search the wall can find the secret door with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. Secret doors swing open on hidden iron hinges and are not locked.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Light***. Most areas are brightly lit by oil lamps in wall sconces, refilled every few hours as needed.

>**What the Redbrands Know**<br>
>If the characters charm or successfully question any of the Redbrands, they can learn the location of their hideout under Tresendar Manor as well as the following useful information:
> - The leader of the Redbrands is a human wizard known as Glasstaff, so named because his magic staff is made of glass.(Only Iarno Albrek and the Black Spider know Glasstaff's real name.) 
>   - Glasstaff's chambers are in the western end of the stronghold (see areas 11 and 12).
>- A mysterious figure called the Black Spider has hired the Redbrands to frighten off adventurers and intimidate the locals, for reasons unknown. 
>   - The Black Spider has sent bugbears to reinforce the Redbrands and provide extra muscle (see area 9).
>- The lower part of the complex is guarded by a hideous "eye monster" (see area 8).
>- The Redbrands have a handful of captives in a holding area "near the old crypts," which are guarded by skeletons (see areas 4 and 5).

## 1. Cellar
Any exploration of the manor grounds finds it deserted, but with plenty of tracks leading to a stone staircase just off the empty ruin of a large kitchen. At the bottom of the stairs stands an unlocked door with a cellar beyond.

When the characters open the door, read the following:

```
The door opens onto a five-foot-wide landing fifteen feet above a large cellar, with stone steps descending to the floor in two short flights. Another door stands beneath the stairs to the north. A large stone cistern occupies the western part of the room, whose walls are lined with kegs and barrels.
```

This room appears to be a large storage cellar, exactly the sort of thing one might expect to find beneath an old manor. The Redbrands want to keep their base of operations hidden, so other than the barrels filled with fresh provisions, nothing in this room gives away their presence.

The barrels contain salted pork and beef, flour, sugar, apples, and ale. Moving barrels around to thoroughly search them is a noisy activity that attracts the attention of the Redbrands in area 2.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Cistern***
This rectangular reservoir is clean and filled with cold, fresh water. It is 10 feet deep with a rim 2 feet higher than the surrounding floor (so that the bottom of the cistern is 8 feet below the floor). Drain pipes from the roof of the old manor above fill the cistern with water.

A waterproof satchel hangs from a submerged rope attached along the south wall of the cistern, about 2 feet below the surface of the water. It's not visible from above the water, but can be found with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check or automatically by a character probing the cistern with a pole or jumping in. The satchel contains some valuable items (see the "Treasure" section).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Secret Door***
A secret door is located in the southwest corner of the room. See the "General Features" section for more information on secret doors.

### Developments
No monsters or villains are found in this area, but the ruffians in area 2 take notice if the characters make a lot of noise here. They creep into the room, gaining surprise if the characters don't hear them (see "Surprise" in the rulebook). If the ruffians fight in this area and two are defeated, the last ruffian might reveal the secret door by fleeing in that direction.

### Treasure
The satchel hidden in the cistern is waterproof and contains a potion of healing, a potion of invisibility, 50 gp, and a clean set of ordinary travel clothing. This is a getaway kit that Iarno keeps here in case of an emergency.

## 2. Barracks
Most of the Redbrands' human members have lodgings in Phandalin. This barracks is a good place to lie low after shaking down local miners and fur traders.

```
This appears to be a storeroom pressed into service as living quarters. Two double bunks stand against the wall near the door, while barrels and crates fill the southern half of the chamber.
```

Three [Redbrand ruffian](npc)s are resting in this room. If they hear a good deal of noise in area 1 (including loud voices or barrels being rolled around), they prepare themselves for a fight and try to surprise intruders.

The barrels here contain similar provisions to those in area 1.

### Treasure
All three Redbrands wear belt pouches holding treasure. The first holds 16 sp and 7 gp; the second, 12 sp and 5 gp; and the third, 15 ep and two garnets (10 gp each). Additionally, three dirty scarlet cloaks hang from the bunks.

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 300 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the ruffians.

## 3. Trapped Hall
This area was part of Tresendar Manor's original cellars. The Redbrands dug out the dirt beneath the stone floor, creating a hidden pit trap.

```
Thick dust covers the flagstones of this somber hallway. The walls are decorated with faux columns every ten feet, and the double doors at the west end of the hall are sheathed in copper plate, now green with age. A relief carving of a mournful angel graces the doors.
```

The pit trap in the middle of the hallway is hidden under a false floor consisting of loose stone tiles laid atop breakaway timbers. The tiles and timbers collapse under 100 or more pounds of weight. A character searching the hall for traps can spot the covered pit with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. A successful check also reveals narrow ledges on the north and south sides of the pit. A creature attempting to skirt around the pit using one of these ledges must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check.

A creature that triggers the trap or fails the Dexterity check to skirt around the edge of the pit must attempt a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw to catch the edge. On a failed save, the creature falls 20 feet to the dirt floor of the pit, taking 2d6 [bludgeoning damage](roll "2d6") and landing [prone](note "Prone@Lib:Rules").

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 100 XP equally among the characters if the party avoids or survives the pit trap.

## 4. Tresendar Crypts
The elders of the long-gone Tresendar family were once laid to rest in this mausoleum.

```
Three large stone sarcophagi stand within this dusty crypt, and propped up against each sarcophagus is a human skeleton clad in bits of rusty mail. False columns along the walls are carved in the image of spreading oak trees. The double doors in the southeast corner are sheathed in tarnished copper plate.
```

The three [skeleton](npc)s are animated and attack any creature that comes within 10 feet of the door leading to area 5 or the door leading to area 6, unless that creature is wearing the scarlet cloak of the Redbrands or speaks the password "Illefarn" (the name of an ancient elven nation, which once spread across much of the Sword Coast).

The stone lid of each sarcophagus is carved to depict the person entombed within-two human males and one human female, all of noble bearing. If opened, the tombs contain mostly moldering bones and scraps of clothing, but see the "Treasure" section.

### Developments
Fighting in this room alerts the Redbrands in area 5 that trouble is on the way.

### Treasure
An ornate gold bracelet (90 gp) lies amid the bones in the sarcophagus containing the female human remains.

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 150 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the skeletons.

## 5. Slave Pens
For the past two months, the Redbrands have been capturing travelers in the area and holding them in these pens until they can be sold into slavery.

```
This long room is partitioned into three areas, with iron bars walling off the north and south. Filthy straw lines the floors of those cells, the hinged doors of which are secured by chains and padlocks. A pair of disheveled human women are held in the cell to the south, while a human boy is confined to the north. All are dressed in plain gray tunics and have iron collars fitted around their necks.

A heap of discarded clothing is piled carelessly against the far wall.
```

Two [Redbrand Ruffian](npc)s in scarlet cloaks stand guard here, though they spend most of their time taunting the hapless prisoners (see the "Captives" section). If they hear fighting in area 5, they take up position against the wall near the door, then try to surprise intruders. The captives are too intimidated to shout warnings or call for help.

The heap of clothing belongs to the various captives who have been housed here over the last two months-at least a dozen people to judge by the size of the pile.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Cell Doors***
The cell doors feature simple locks requiring thieves' tools and a successful DC 10 Dexterity check to pick. The doors can also be wrenched open by brute force with a successful DC 22 Strength check.

### Captives
The three human [commoner](npc)s imprisoned here are **Mirna Dendrar** and her two teenage children, thirteen-year-old **Nars** and eighteen-year-old **Nilsa**. A few days ago, the Redbrands murdered Mirna's husband, **Thel**, for defying them. (His corpse can be found in area 8.) That night, the gang returned and abducted the family from their home in Phandalin. The gang plans to sell the family into slavery.

* **Ruby** knows **Mirna**, they were in creche together in thundertree.

The Dendrars are grateful to the characters for rescuing them, but they can't provide much information about the Redbrand hideout. All they know is that the boss is a wizard (though they haven't met him and don't know his name), and that he has "tall, furry monsters with big ears" (bugbears) working for him.

 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**Side Quest: Mirna's Heirloom**. Though her family has nothing to offer as a reward, Mirna tells the characters that she might know where a valuable heirloom is hidden. When she was a young girl, she and her family fled from the town of Thundertree after undead overran the place. Her family had an herb and alchemy shop, inside which a case containing an emerald necklace was hidden beneath a section of storage shelves. She never dared to return and retrieve it. The shop was in the southeast part of Thundertree. If the characters decide to explore the ruins of Thundertree, see part 3 of the adventure.

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the ruffians. Divide 100 XP equally among the characters if the Dendrars make it back to town alive.

## 6. Armory
The door to this room is locked from the outside. Across from the locked door is a secret door that leads to area 7. For more information on locked doors and secret doors, see the "General Features" section (page 20).

```
Racks of weapons line the walls of this chamber, including spears, swords, crossbows, and bolts. A dozen dirty red cloaks hang from hooks by the door.
```

The Redbrands have ambitious plans to expand their numbers in the near future, so they have been stockpiling arms and armor.

The weapon racks hold twelve spears, six shortswords, four longswords, six light crossbows, and eight quivers holding twenty crossbow bolts each.

## 7. Storeroom and Work Area
In this chamber, the Redbrands take stock of their stolen wares, either shipping them out through the cavern to the south or packaging them for storage in the stronghold.

```
This area is the north end of a large natural cavern, but it has been finished with dressed stone block walls and a flagstone floor. Several barrels are stored against the walls here, along with a number of empty crates, straw for packing, hammers, pry bars, and nails.
The cavern continues for some distance to the south. You can make out several passages that open up off the larger cavern, and what looks like a deep pit or crevasse in the floor.
```

This room contains two secret doors, one leading to area 6 and the other to area 12. See the "General Features" section (link below) for more information on secret doors.

### Treasure
Most of the provisions and goods here aren't valuable, but lying among them are thirty beaver pelts (2 gp each). They were looted from a caravan on the Triboar Trail a few days ago.

## 8. Crevasse
The characters arrive here by one of three routes: the tunnel from area 1, the storeroom at area 7, or the roughhewn passage to the south, which continues off the map for about one hundred feet and emerges from a tunnel in the woods south of Tresendar Manor. The passage is an excellent way to smuggle people or goods in and out of Phandalin without being seen, and is thus perfect for a gang of slavers and thieves.

```
A cold breeze fills this large natural cavern, carrying with it the faint scent of decaying flesh. A crevasse divides the cavern and is flanked by two rough stone columns that support the twenty-foot-high ceiling. Two arched wooden bridges span the chasm.
```

The guardian of this cave is a [nothic](npc), an insane subterranean monster that hungers for flesh. The creature, lured by a faint magical effect emanating from the crevasse, was occupying the area when the Redbrands moved in. Iarno managed to strike a bargain with the monster, convincing it to help guard the stronghold in exchange for treasure and the occasional gift of fresh meat. Still, the nothic is untrustworthy.

The nothic lurks near the west ends of the two bridges. If it notices intruders entering the cave, it hides behind one of the large stone columns and watches them, attempting to use its Weird Insight (see the creature's stat block) to discern the characters' secrets.

The nothic communicates using telepathy. If detected, it prefers to negotiate and isn't above betraying the Redbrands for the right incentive, such as the promise of food. When roleplaying the nothic, consider speaking in whispers and throwing in some mad cackles and bits of gibberish. Also be sure to mention that the creature isn't actually talking but rather filling the characters' heads with its foul murmurings and demands for food. The nothic knows everything the Redbrands know; see the "What the Redbrands Know" sidebar on page 20.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Bridges***
These bridges are made of wooden planks and have no rails. The south one is rigged to collapse when a creature weighing more than 50 pounds moves across it. A character next to the bridge can discern that the construction is faulty with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check. Any creature can use an action to dislodge one end of either bridge, dropping it into the crevasse.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Crevasse***
This steep-sided fissure is 5 to 10 feet wide and 20 feet deep. Its rough walls are easily climbed without an ability check. A creature that falls into the crevasse takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage and lands [prone](note "Prone@Lib:Rules") in a jumble of rubble that is [difficult terrain](note "8b. Movement@Lib:Rules") (see "Difficult Terrain" in the rulebook).

The bottom of the crevasse feels unnaturally cold. When viewed with a detect magic spell, the area emanates a faint necromantic aura. The magic causes all organic matter in the crevasse to age and decompose at half the normal rate.

Currently heaped at the bottom among broken and well-gnawed bones is the half-eaten body of Thel Dendrar, the woodcarver of Phandalin who was murdered by the Redbrands. The outlaws left his corpse here for the nothic to feed on.

### Treasure
The nothic keeps its hoard in a battered wooden chest hidden in a cubbyhole at the bottom of the crevasse, under the north bridge. The chest can't be seen from the edge of the crevasse, but is obvious to any character who descends into the fissure. The chest contains 160 sp, 120 gp, five malachite gems (15 gp each), two potions of healing, and a scroll of augury.

The chest also holds a +1 longsword in a silver-chased scabbard. The sword is inscribed with the name "Talon," and its hilt is worked in the shape of a bird of prey with outspread wings. It once belonged to a great knight named Aldith Tresendar, known as the Black Hawk. A character who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (History) check recognizes the sword and recalls this lore.

Sir Aldith died fighting off the orcs that attacked through the hidden caverns below his manor. Talon was lost here until the nothic found it.

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 450 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the nothic or negotiates a truce with it.

## 9. Guard Barracks
A character who listens at this door with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check hears several gruff voices issuing demeaning commands in the Goblin tongue. Examples include "Lick the floor!" and "Roll like a dog!" The bugbears here are bullying their goblin slave.

```
This barracks contains four roughly built wooden bunks, with heaped-up blankets and dirty dishes scattered about. A strong smell of unwashed bodies and rotten meat fills the air. Three tall, furry humanoids are lounging among the mess, barking orders at a sad little goblin that demeans itself for their amusement. Your sudden appearance causes the goblin to faint.
```

Three [bugbear](npc)s and one [goblin](npc) are present. The goblin, Droop, falls unconscious at the sight of the party, but another creature can use an action to wake him. Otherwise, Droop remains unconscious for 1d10 minutes.

The bugbears work for the Black Spider and were sent here to help Iarno keep the Redbrands and the citizens of Phandalin in line. The leader is named Mosk. He wears a jeweled eye patch even though he has both his eyes. Mask wears the eye patch because he thinks it's fancy.

The bugbears avoid the human members of the Redbrands. If the characters are wearing scarlet cloaks taken from elsewhere, the bugbears assume that they serve Iarno. Clever characters might even persuade the bugbears to help deal with "traitors" or "impostors" elsewhere in the dungeon. If you don't think the players are doing a great job roleplaying the deception, you can have the character who is doing most of the talking make a DC 15 Charisma (Deception) check to convince the bugbears to do what the party wants.

### Role Playing Droop
The goblin, Droop, is not a threat to the party. He has been cowed by the bugbears and follows their orders until someone stronger comes along.

If he regains consciousness during combat, Droop hides and avoids the fight. He is such a coward that if he is ordered to fight, he does so with disadvantage (as explained in the rulebook).

Droop knows the general layout of the Redbrand hideout, as well as the location of its secret doors and traps. He doesn't think to offer up the information, but if prompted, he reveals as much as he can remember in an attempt to be useful to the party. Some of the details might be confusing or mixed up. He is a goblin, after all.

If the bugbears are dispatched, Droop tries to ingratiate himself with the party. He doesn't remember the route to Cragmaw Castle, but he knows it's up north, in the forest. He also knows that Cragmaw goblins patrol around Phandalin, and he suggests the characters might be able to capture a patrol to learn more about the castle.

Characters might be inclined to keep Droop around for a while. See the "NPC Party Members" sidebar (page 11) for advice on how to run Droop as a member of the party.

### Developments
The bugbears are the only ones in the Redbrand hideout who know the location of Wave Echo Cave. They won't willingly divulge this information, since they fear the Black Spider more than they fear the characters.

The bugbears also know the location of Cragmaw Castle. but again, they don't share this information readily. A character who interrogates a captured bugbear can pry the information loose with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation) check.

### Treasure
Mosk carries a belt pouch containing 33 sp and wears an eye patch made of black leather set with semiprecious stones (50 gp). He also has an iron key that locks and unlocks all the doors in the Redbrand hideout.

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 600 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the bugbears.

## 10. Common Room
This area serves as the headquarters and meeting room for the Redbrands. When there is no official business to discuss, it doubles as a common room where the stronghold guards can relax while off duty.

A character who listens at the door with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check hears the villains within engaged in a game of knucklebones. This makes for a mysterious rattling sound, followed by shouts and groans and a sudden gabble of voices as wagers are paid. If the characters burst into the room, they automatically surprise its occupants.

```
Several worn tables and chairs are scattered around this large room. Wooden benches are drawn up against walls decorated with draperies of brown and red, and several ale kegs are propped up and tapped.
Four tough-looking human warriors wearing scarlet cloaks are gathered around one of the tables. A stack of coins and trinkets is heaped upon the tabletop between them.
```

Four [Redbrand ruffian](npc)s are drinking and playing knucklebones when the characters enter. The game isn't far from turning acrimonious, as most of them do. The dice are loaded, and the ruffian to which they belong is naturally winning. All four have been drinking heavily, and they are [poisoned](note "Poisoned@Lib:Rules")

The Redbrands immediately recognize characters wearing scarlet cloaks as impostors. However, fast-talking characters might still be able to pass themselves off as "new recruits," especially if they offer to join the game. If you don't think the players are doing a great job roleplaying the deception, you can have the character who is doing most of the talking make a DC 10 Charisma (Deception) check to fool the Redbrands.

### Treasure
The wealth in the room is all on the table, having been bet in the game. (Knocking over the table or mixing up all the enemies' loot is a great way to distract them for a short time.) The total amounts to 75 cp, 55 sp, 22 ep, 15 gp, and a gold earring set with a tiny ruby (30 gp).

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 400 XP equally among the characters if the party defeats the Redbrands in this room.

## 11. Wizard's Workshop
Faint bubbling and dripping sounds can be heard through either door of this room with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check.

```
This room appears to be a wizard's workshop. A rat scurries across the floor and takes refuge under a large worktable set up with alembics, retorts, distillation coils, and other alchemical devices, all of it stewing and bubbling away. Bookshelves are crowded with sheaves of parchment and strange-looking tomes.
```

Iarno has left his rat familiar here to watch for intruders. The rat shares a telepathic bond with its master, and it sends a brief warning message to Iarno as soon as it detects intruders. The rat moves at a speed of 20 feet and has AC 10, 1 hit point, and no effective attacks. If the rat is killed, it disappears.

If the characters leave the rat unharmed, it follows them around as though curious or hungry. It might even feign affection for a character who feeds it, though it remains absolutely loyal to Iarno.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;***Books and Notes***
Iarno is trying to master the art of brewing potions and concocting alchemical mixtures. The books and notes scattered around the room are basic texts on alchemy. Any character proficient in Arcana can see that Iarno's apparatus appears to be set up to brew potions of invisibility, not that he has succeeded so far.

Among the books is a tome written in Dwarvish. The journal of an adventurer named Urmon, it describes the history of the Lost Mine of Phandelver and the Forge of Spells. (Share this information in the first and second paragraph of the "[Background](note "Background@LMoP Notebook")" section if you have not already done so.) In addition, Urmon records that a magic mace named lightbringer was commissioned by priests of Lathander, the god of dawn, from the mages working with the gnomes and dwarves of the Phandelver's Pact. The mace was lost when Wave Echo Cave and its mine vanished from history. (Characters might find the mace in part 4, "Wave Echo Cave.")

### Developments
Because Iarno and his rat familiar share a telepathic bond, the mage (in area 12) knows the characters are coming and has time to prepare for them.

### Treasure
Most of the materials in this room have no value, but three small bottles hold rare reagents: mercury, dragon bile, and powdered nightshade. These are worth 25 gp each to an apothecary or alchemist.

## 12. Glasstaff's Quarters
If the characters approach this room through the secret passage from area 7, they can surprise the leader of the Redbrands-Iarno "Glasstaff" Albrek. Otherwise, his rat familiar warns him of any who approach through area 11, and he flees before the characters arrive.

```
The walls of this bedchamber are covered with drapes of scarlet cloth. The furnishings include a small writing desk with matching chair, a comfortable-looking bed, and a wooden chest at the foot of the bed.
```

If Iarno is surprised, add the following paragraph: 

```
Sitting at the desk is a short, dark-bearded human male in robes, studying a tome. He wears a princely mantle of ermine. A beautiful glass staff leans against his chair, within easy reach.
```

If the rat in area 11 warns him that trouble is approaching, Iarno the [evil mage](npc) grabs his staff of defense and the scrolls in his chest (see the "Treasure" section), and flees through the secret door in the northeast corner of the room. In his haste, Iarno leaves behind a letter from the Black Spider (see the "Developments" section) and neglects to make sure the secret door is closed all the way. Characters gain advantage on ability checks made to find the slightly ajar secret door (see "Advantage and Disadvantage" in the rulebook). For more information on secret doors, see the "General Features" section (page 20).

If he manages to escape, Iarno flees to area 1 (through areas 7 and 8) and grabs the satchel hidden in the cistern there. If the nothic is still alive in area 8, Iarno instructs it to waylay any pursuers. If the characters catch up to him, Iarno quaffs the potion of invisibility in the satchel and flees the hideout. At your discretion, he could reappear later in the adventure.

### Roleplaying Iarno
A former member of the Lords' Alliance, Iarno seized an opportunity in Phandalin to line his own pockets. Originally tasked with setting up a constabulary, the mage instead assembled a group of outlaws and local ruffians to secure his own position in town.

Iarno knew of the Black Spider through his contacts in the Lords' Alliance and brokered a meeting. The drow promised to share the secrets and wealth of the Forge of Spells with the wizard in exchange for his help and loyalty.

Iarno puts on airs of gentility and courteous manners, addressing his ruffians as "my good gentlemen," and referring to sordid acts such as kidnapping or arson as "that unpleasant little business" or "those unfortunate events." He refers to the characters as "guests" and expresses regret that he cannot provide suitable entertainment for their visit. Beneath his genteel demeanor, however, Iarno is just as thuggish and arrogant as any Redbrand outlaws.

If threatened, Iarno uses his staff of defense to cast mage armor on himself. He then casts offensive spells at enemies he can see. Iarno's stat block contains a list of the spells he has prepared. For descriptions of those spells and their effects, see the rulebook. Iarno uses the shield power of his staff for added protection.

If he is reduced to 8 or fewer hit points and has no avenues of escape, Iarno surrenders. He values his life more than anything, and he remains a model prisoner in the hopes that the Black Spider will somehow learn of his predicament and "arrange for his freedom."

If he is questioned while in captivity, Iarno relates the following information, all of which is true:

- The Black Spider is a drow (dark elf).
- The Black Spider sent four bugbears to help Iarno keep the population of Phandalin under control, but the Redbrands have managed without them. The bugbears know the way to Wave Echo Cave, but Iarno does not.
- The Black Spider is searching Wave Echo Cave for the Forge of Spells. Dwarves and gnomes of the Phandelver's Pact used the magical forge to fashion powerful magic items.
- No other members of the Lords' Alliance know of Iarno's betrayal.

### Developments
Various papers and notes are stacked neatly on the desk, mostly consisting of Iarno's written orders to apothecaries and alchemists in nearby settlements for more materials for his workshop. The characters also find a letter signed with the Black Spider's symbol.

```
Lord Albrek,

My spies in Neverwinter tell me that strangers are due to arrive in Phandalin. They could be working for the dwarves.

Capture them if you can, kill them if you must, but don't allow them to upset our plans. See that any dwarven maps in their possession are delivered to me with haste.

I'm counting on you, Iarno. Don't disappoint me.
```

If Iarno is taken into custody, Sildar Hallwinter arranges to have the wizard incarcerated in the townmaster's hall until he can be safely transported back to Neverwinter. Whether Iarno stands trial for his crimes is beyond the scope of this adventure. The Black Spider is too preoccupied to meddle in the wizard's fate.

### Treasure
At the foot of Iarno's bed is a sturdy, unlocked wooden chest holding the best pickings of the Redbrands' loot over the last two months. It contains 180 sp, 130 gp, and a silk pouch containing five carnelians (10 gp each), two peridots (15 gp each), and one pearl (100 gp). It also contains two magic items that Iarno brought with him from Neverwinter: a scroll of charm person and a scroll of fireball.

Iarno also wields a [staff of defense](note "Appendix A - Magic Items@Lib:LMoP Notebook").

### Awarding Experience Points
Divide 200 XP equally among the characters if the party slays Iarno Albrek. Double the XP award if they capture Iarno and deliver him to Sildar Hallwinter in Phandalin.

## What's Next?
The next stage of the adventure continues with part 3, "The Spider's Web," in which the characters undertake a number of short adventures that advance the story. At some point during part 2, the characters are likely to advance to 3rd level, so make sure the players are keeping track of their XP.