# Wyvern Tor
This crag is a prominent landmark in the rugged hills northeast of the Sword Mountains, and is easily visible from twenty miles away. People traveling along the Triboar Trail in the vicinity of Conyberry catch glimpses of Wyvern Tor to the south as they go. The tor was formerly the home of a large and dangerous nest of wyverns, but a band of bold adventurers dealt with the monsters years ago. Though the wyverns never returned, other creatures lair here from time to time. Wyvern Tor's current squatters include a band of orcs and their ogre ally.

The orcs are scouts of the Many Arrows tribe. These orcs often roam into the more civilized areas of the North, spying out human settlements, waylaying travelers, and looting and plundering as opportunities present themselves. Stories of new settlers near Phandalin and renewed traffic along the old Triboar Trail drew this band to the area. Their leader is Brughor Axe-Biter—a savage brute who is more interested in murdering and looting than scouting.

## Orc Camp
Wyvern Tor is a sizable hill, with miles of rugged terrain on its flanks and slopes. Searching for the hidden orc camp takes time. The party can attempt one DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check or DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check per hour to find the camp, made by the character leading the way.

When the characters find the camp, read the following:

```
The faint smell of smoke hangs on the air as you ascend a rugged ridge on the lower slopes of the hill. Fifty yards away, a cave mouth opens up at the bottom of a ravine. Hunkered down by a boulder twenty yards outside the cave, keeping watch, is a single orc.
```

If the characters can quietly and expeditiously take out the lone [orc](npc), they have a chance to surprise the orcs in the cave. If the sentry spots the characters sneaking up, or if it is not silenced during the surprise round, the orc retreats back to the cave to warn the others.

The marauders in the cave include Brughor Axe-Biter (an orc with 30 hit points), six ordinary orcs, and a filthy [ogre](npc) named Gog. Gog fights until slain, while the orcs fight until Brughor is killed, at which point any remaining orcs flee.

### Treasure
Brughor's band plundered several homesteads farther north on their way to Wyvern Tor. An unlocked treasure chest in the cave holds 750 cp, 180 sp, 62 ep, 30 gp, and three vials of perfume (10 gp each).

### Awarding Experience Points
Defeating the monsters at Wyvern Tor completes a quest given to the party by Townmaster Harbin Wester in Phandalin, and it delivers on a promise to Hamun Kost at Old Owl Well. Divide 1,250 XP equally among the characters if the party deals with the orcs and the ogre.
